[docs] Custom indexer (#22995)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/concepts/custom-indexer/pipeline-architecture.mdx

---
title: Indexer Pipeline Architecture
description: The `sui-indexer-alt-framework` provides two distinct pipeline architectures. Understand the differences between the sequential and concurrent pipelines that the `sui-indexer-alt-framework` provides to decide which best suits your project needs.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keywords: [ indexer, index data, sui-indexer, custom indexer, sequential pipeline, concurrent pipeline ]
---
```

### Application-level coordination

`Watermark` feedback provides application-level coordination by reporting progress to the `Regulator` through `Watermark` updates. Further coordination is provided via bounded ingestion, where the `Regulator` only signals fetches within a bounded range ahead of the current watermark.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/ingestion/regulator.rs#bound}
    
Finally, memory protection ensures the entire system operates within predictable memory bounds.

### Backpressure in practice

Basic example: Slow database scenario

1. **Initial state**: Your indexer is processing 100 checkpoints/second.
1. **Bottleneck appears**: Database becomes slow (maybe high load, maintenance, or similar) - can now handle only 50 commits/second
1. **Backpressure cascade**:
    - `Committer` channel fills up (can't commit fast enough).
    - `Collector` stops sending to `Committer` (channel full).
    - `Processor` workers stop sending to `Collector` (channel full).
    - `Broadcaster` stops sending to `Processors` (channel full).
    - `Regulator` stops requesting new checkpoints (channel full).
1. **End result**:

>     - Indexer automatically slows to 50 checkpoints/second (matching database capacity).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Indexer automatically slows to 50 checkpoints per second, matching database capacity.
```

>     - Memory stays bounded - no runaway growth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Memory stays bounded, no runaway growth.
```

>     - No data loss - everything just processes slower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - No data loss as everything just processes slower.
```

    - System is stable at the bottleneck's pace.
1. **Recovery**: When database speeds up, channels start draining and indexer automatically returns to full speed.

What happens:

- Slower checkpoint progress in logs and metrics.
- Stable memory usage (no growth).
- System remains responsive, just at reduced throughput.

## Performance tuning

> The following sections detail the configuration settings you can employ to get the best performance from your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections detail the configuration settings you can implement for optimal performance. 
```

}
```

Tuning guidelines: 

- **`FANOUT`:** Increase for CPU-intensive processing, decrease for memory-constrained environments.
- **`MIN_EAGER_ROWS`:** Lower values reduce data commit latency (individual data appears in database sooner), higher values improve overall throughput (more efficient larger batches).
- **`MAX_PENDING_ROWS`:** Controls how much data can accumulate when the committer falls behind. Higher values provide more buffer space but use more memory during bottlenecks.
- **`MAX_WATERMARK_UPDATES`:** Lower for sparse pipelines (rare events), keep default for dense pipelines.

### CommitterConfig optimization

The `CommitterConfig` controls how data flows from collection to database commits:

```rust
let config = ConcurrentConfig {
    committer: CommitterConfig {
        // Number of parallel database writers (default: 5)
        write_concurrency: 10,
        
        // How often collector checks for batches in ms (default: 500)
        collect_interval_ms: 250,
        
        // How often watermarks are updated in ms (default: 500)
        watermark_interval_ms: 1000,
    },
    pruner: Some(pruner_config),
};
```

Tuning guidelines:

> - **`write_concurrency`:** Higher values = faster throughput but more database connections; `ensure total_pipelines` × `write_concurrency` < `db_connection_pool_size`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`write_concurrency`:** Higher values result in faster throughput but more database connections; `ensure total_pipelines` × `write_concurrency` < `db_connection_pool_size`.
```

[Concurrent pipelines](#concurrent-pipeline-architecture) commit out-of-order and can commit individual checkpoints partially. This allows you to process multiple checkpoints simultaneously for higher throughput, but requires reads to check which data is fully committed to ensure consistency.

## When to use each pipeline

Both pipeline types can handle updates in place, aggregations, and complex business logic. While sequential pipelines have throughput limitations compared to concurrent, the decision to use one over the other is primarily about engineering complexity rather than performance needs.

### Recommended: Sequential pipeline

Start here for most use cases. Provides more straightforward implementation and maintenance.

<ul className="list-none pl-2">
<li><span className="text-sui-success-dark">✓</span> You want straightforward implementation with direct commits and simple queries</li>
<li><span className="text-sui-success-dark">✓</span> Team prefers predictable, easy-to-debug behavior</li>
<li><span className="text-sui-success-dark">✓</span> Current performance meets your requirements</li>

> <li><span className="text-sui-success-dark">✓</span> Operational simplicity is valued</li>

Author: This is an ugly way to do it. We should create some list types like these...eventually.

To customize, your code uses two key functions that the committer calls:

`batch()`: Data merging logic.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/sequential/mod.rs#fun=batch}

`commit()`: Database write logic.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/sequential/mod.rs#fun=commit}

### Backpressure mechanisms

![Backpressure sequential pipeline architecture](./images/backpressure-sequential.png)

Sequential pipelines use two layers of backpressure to prevent memory overflow and ordering-related deadlocks:

#### Channel-based backpressure

Sequential pipelines use the same channel-based flow control as concurrent pipelines (see [concurrent pipeline backpressure](#concurrent-backpressure) for detailed mechanics), but with a simpler topology due to fewer components:

- **Broadcaster → Processor:** `checkpoint_buffer_size` slots.
- **Processor → Committer:** `FANOUT + PIPELINE_BUFFER` slots.

#### Watermark-based regulation (sequential-specific) {#sequential-watermark-regulation}

Sequential pipelines must process checkpoints in strict order (N, then N+1, then N+2...). If checkpoint N is missing, they cannot commit later checkpoints, even if available.

> Without regulation, missing checkpoints can cause deadlocks in situations like the following one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without regulation, missing checkpoints can cause deadlocks in situations such as:
```

Before diving into the concurrent pipeline architecture, make sure you understand the watermark system covered in the the [previous section](#watermark-system). The watermark concepts (`checkpoint_hi_inclusive`, `reader_lo`, `pruner_hi`, and `retention`) are fundamental to how every component in the concurrent pipeline operates and coordinates.

### Architecture overview

The concurrent pipeline transforms raw checkpoint data into indexed database records through a sophisticated multi-stage architecture designed for maximum throughput while maintaining data integrity:

![Concurrent Pipeline Diagram](./images/concurrent.png)

Key design principles:

- **Watermark coordination:** Safe out-of-order processing with consistency guarantees.
- **Handler abstraction:** Your business logic plugs into the framework.
- **Automatic storage management:** Framework handles watermark tracking and data cleanup within the `Watermark` database.

### Concurrent pipeline components {#concurrent-components}

There are six components to concurrent pipelines.

1. [Processor](#con-processor)
1. [Collector](#con-collector)
1. [Committer](#con-committer)

> 1. [Commit Watermark](#con-commit-watermark)
> 1. [Reader Watermark](#con-reader-watermark)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Commit watermark](#con-commit-watermark)
1. [Reader watermark](#con-reader-watermark)
```

The `Collector` receives out-of-order processed data from multiple `Processor` workers. It then buffers data until reaching optimal batch size (`MIN_EAGER_ROWS`) or until a timeout is met (to preserve forward progress for quiet pipelines).

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/concurrent/mod.rs#variable=MIN_EAGER_ROWS}
    
The `Collector` combines data from multiple checkpoints into single database write batches and applies backpressure when too much data is pending (`MAX_PENDING_ROWS`).

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/concurrent/mod.rs#variable=MAX_PENDING_ROWS}
    
Database writes are expensive; batching dramatically improves throughput by reducing the number of database round trips.

#### `Committer` {#con-committer}

The `Committer` primarily writes batched data to the database using parallel connections with retry logic. It does this by receiving optimized batches from `Collector`, then spawns up parallel database writers to `write_concurrency`.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/mod.rs#struct=CommitterConfig}

- Each writer calls your `Handler::commit()` method with exponential backoff retry.

> - Reports successful writes to `CommitWatermark` component.

Author: Aha! How timely.

:::important

The `Committer` tasks don't actually perform database operations. Rather, it calls your handler's `commit()` method. You must implement the actual database logic.

:::

#### `Commit Watermark` {#con-commit-watermark}

> The primary responsibility of the commit `Watermark` is to track which checkpoints are fully committed and update `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` in the `Watermark` table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary responsibility of the `CommitWatermark` is to track which checkpoints are fully committed and update `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` in the `Watermark` table.
```

The `Watermark` receives `WatermarkParts` from successful `Committer` writes.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/mod.rs#struct=WatermarkPart}
    
The `Watermark` maintains an in-memory map of checkpoint completion status, advancing `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` only when there are no gaps in the sequence. Periodically, it writes the new `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` to the `Watermark` database.

This component enforces the critical rule that `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` can advance only when all data up to that point is committed with no gaps. This component enforces that critical rule. See the [watermark system](#watermark-system) for details.

By using polling, updates happen on a configurable interval (`watermark_interval_ms`) rather than immediately, balancing consistency with performance.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/mod.rs#struct=CommitterConfig highlight=watermark_interval_ms}

> #### `Reader Watermark` {#con-reader-watermark}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `ReaderWatermark` {#con-reader-watermark}
```

The primary responsibility of the reader `Watermark` is to calculate and update `reader_lo` to maintain the retention policy and provide safe pruning boundaries.

The reader `Watermark` polls the `Watermark` database periodically (`interval_ms`) to check current `checkpoint_hi_inclusive`. It then calculates the new `reader_lo = checkpoint_hi_inclusive - retention + 1` value and updates the `reader_lo` and `pruner_timestamp` in the `Watermark` database. This behavior provides the safety buffer that prevents premature pruning.

The `reader_lo` value represents the lowest checkpoint guaranteed to be available. This component ensures your retention policy is maintained. See the [watermark system](#watermark-system) for details.

#### `Pruner` {#con-pruner}

The primary responsibility of the `Pruner` is to remove old data based on retention policies and to update `pruner_hi`.

The `Pruner` waits for the safety delay (`delay_ms`) after `reader_lo` updates.

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/concurrent/mod.rs#struct=PrunerConfig highlight=delay_ms}
    

> The `Pruner` then calculates which checkpoints can be safely deleted and spawns up to `prune_concurrency` parallel cleanup tasks.

Author: Left as is because of the code between the sentences. As someone with the memory of a goldfish, I would have forgotten what "it" was referencing by the time I scrolled past the codeblock. As someone with the memory...

The `Handler` is where you implement your indexing business logic. The framework calls three key methods:

```rust
trait Processor {
    // Called by Processor workers
    fn process(&self, checkpoint: &CheckpointData) -> Vec<Self::Value>;
}

trait Handler { 
    // Called by Committer workers  
    async fn commit(&[Self::Value], &mut Connection) -> Result<usize>;
    
    // Called by Pruner workers
    async fn prune(&self, from: u64, to: u64, &mut Connection) -> Result<usize>;
}
```

:::important

The framework components (`Committer`, `Pruner`) are orchestrators that manage concurrency, retries, and watermark coordination. The actual database operations happen in your `Handler` methods.

:::

### Watermark table management

The `Watermarks` table manages all watermark coordination. It is critical for recovery, as the framework reads this table to resume from the correct checkpoint.

The framework automatically creates and manages a `Watermarks` table in your database when you first run your indexer. The table might have only one row per pipeline, allowing multiple indexers to share the same database.

`Watermarks` schema:

{@inject: crates/sui-pg-db/src/schema.rs noComments}

> ## Backpressure mechanisms {#concurrent-backpressure}

Reviewer: In the" Sequential pipeline Architecture" section, there is a "Backpressure mechanisms" subheading, but then no corresponding one for "Concurrent pipeline architecture" section. Then, this "Backpressure mechanisms "section is its own thing. Should we combine the stuff from the "Sequential pipeline" section into this section for cohesion? Having two sections with the same title but different locations on the page is a bit confusing from a skimming-the-page perspective

### Backpressure in practice

Basic example: Slow database scenario

1. **Initial state**: Your indexer is processing 100 checkpoints per second.
1. **Bottleneck appears**: Database becomes slow (maybe high load, maintenance, or similar) and can now only handle 50 commits per second.
1. **Backpressure cascade**:
    - `Committer` channel fills up (can't commit fast enough).
    - `Collector` stops sending to `Committer` (channel full).
    - `Processor` workers stop sending to `Collector` (channel full).
    - `Broadcaster` stops sending to `Processors` (channel full).
    - `Regulator` stops requesting new checkpoints (channel full).
1. **End result**:
    - Indexer automatically slows to 50 checkpoints per second, matching database capacity.
    - Memory stays bounded, no runaway growth.
    - No data loss as everything just processes slower.
    - System is stable at the bottleneck's pace.
1. **Recovery**: When database speeds up, channels start draining and indexer automatically returns to full speed.

What happens:

- Slower checkpoint progress in logs and metrics.
- Stable memory usage (no growth).
- System remains responsive, just at reduced throughput.

> ## Performance tuning

Reviewer: Same comment as the Backpressure mechanisms one above, there is an existing subheading for Performance tuning in "Sequantial pipeline architecture" - should we combine that section with this one?

Author: Nailed it. All headings from here down needed another nest level.

The following sections detail the configuration settings you can implement for optimal performance.

> ### Concurrent pipeline Handler constants

Reviewer: Other headings on this page are doing the tics so 🤷🏻

> ### Concurrent pipeline Handler constants

Author: Yeah, it'll be in style guide soon. I don't think the temp mismatch across other pages is a biggie.

    - Performance: Out-of-order processing maximizes throughput.

This watermark system is what makes concurrent pipelines both high-performance and reliable, enabling massive throughput while maintaining strong data availability guarantees and automatic storage management.

### Scenario 1: Basic watermark (no pruning)

With pruning disabled, the indexer reports each pipeline's committer `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` only. Consider the following timeline, where a number of checkpoints are being processed and some are committed out of order.

```sh
Checkpoint Processing Timeline:

[1000] [1001] [1002] [1003] [1004] [1005]
  ✓      ✓      ✗      ✓      ✗      ✗
         ^
  checkpoint_hi = 1001

✓ = Committed (all data written)
✗ = Not Committed (processing or failed)
```

In this scenario, the `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` is at 1001, even though checkpoint 1003 is committed, because there is still a gap at 1002. The indexer must report the high watermark at 1001 to satisfy the guarantee that all data from start to `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` is available.

After the checkpoint 1002 is committed, you can safely read data up to 1003.

```sh
[1000] [1001] [1002] [1003] [1004] [1005]

>   ✓      ✓      ✓      ✓      ✗       ✓

Reviewer 2: nit: Just noticed that the checkpoint 1005 should not be done here, we should update the icon to "✗" for checkpoint 1005 here. Same for all checkpoints 1005 below

[---- SAFE TO READ -------]
(start   →   checkpoint_hi_inclusive at 1003)
```

### Scenario 2: Pruning enabled

Pruning is enabled for pipelines configured with a retention policy. For example, if your table is growing too large and you want to keep only the last four checkpoints, then `retention = 4`. This means that the indexer periodically updates `reader_lo` as the difference between `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` and the configured retention. A separate pruning task is responsible for pruning data between `[pruner_hi, reader_lo]`.

```sh
[998] [999] [1000] [1001] [1002] [1003] [1004] [1005] [1006]

>  🗑️    🗑️     ✓      ✓      ✓      ✓      ✗      ✓      ✗

Reviewer 2: same here: checkpoint 1005 should be ✗ and checkpoint 1006 should be ✓

              ^                    ^
       reader_lo = 1000       checkpoint_hi = 1003

🗑️ = Pruned (deleted)
✓ = Committed  
✗ = Not Committed
```

Current watermarks:

- `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` = 1003:
       - All data from start to 1003 is complete (no gaps).
       - Cannot advance to 1005 because 1004 is not committed yet (gap).

- `reader_lo` = 1000:
       - Lowest checkpoint guaranteed to be available.
       - Calculated as: `reader_lo = checkpoint_hi - retention + 1`.
       - `reader_lo` = 1003 - 4 + 1 = 1000.

- `pruner_hi` = 999:

>        - Highest checkpoint that has been deleted.

Reviewer 2: Highest **exclusive** checkpoint that has been deleted

       - Checkpoints 998 and 999 were deleted to save space.

Clear safe zones:

```sh
[998] [999] [1000] [1001] [1002] [1003] [1004] [1005] [1006]

>  🗑️    🗑️     ✓      ✓      ✓      ✓      ✗      ✓      ✗

Reviewer 2: same here: Update 1005 to ✗ and 1006 to ✓

[--PRUNED--][--- Safe Reading Zone ---] [--- Processing ---]             
```

### How watermarks progress over time

**Step 1:** Checkpoint 1004 completes.

```sh
[999] [1000] [1001] [1002] [1003] [1004] [1005] [1006] [1007]
 🗑️     ✓      ✓      ✓      ✓      ✓      ✗      ✓      ✗
        ^                           ^
 reader_lo = 1000           checkpoint_hi = 1004 (advanced by 1!)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Add more explanation:

With checkpoint 1004 now committed, `checkpoint_hi_inclusive` can advance from 1003 → 1004 since there are no gaps up to 1004. Note that `reader_lo` and `pruner_hi` haven't changed yet.
